---
title: Study Design
---

## Design

The data contained in the various MMP databases have been gathered using an approach that borrows from anthropological
and sociological research methods. In particular, our study employs the Ethnosurvey approach, which combines the
techniques of ethnographic fieldwork and representative survey sampling to gather qualitative as well as quantitative
data. The two kinds of empirical data are compared throughout the study to yield results of greater validity than either
ethnography or a sample survey could provide alone. This method was designed to provide a picture of Mexican-US
migration that is historically grounded, ethnographically interpretable, quantitatively accurate, and rooted in
receiving as well as sending areas.

Each year, during the winter months (when seasonal migrants tend to return home), the MMP randomly samples households in
communities located throughout Mexico. After gathering social, demographic, and economic information on the household
and its members, interviewers collect basic immigration information on each person's first and last trip to the United
States. From household heads and spouses, we compile detailed year-by-year labor history and migration information; in
addition, for household head migrants, we administer a detailed series of questions about their last trip to the U.S.,
focusing on employment, earnings, and use of U.S. social services.

Following completion of the Mexican surveys, interviewers travel to destination areas in the United States to administer
identical questionnaires to migrants from the same communities sampled in Mexico who have settled north of the border
and no longer return home. These surveys are combined with those conducted in Mexico to generate a representative
binational sample.

## Selecting Communities

The process of selecting communities for the Mexican Migration has traditionally relied on anthropological methods.
Communities are chosen after a personal reconnaissance of the geographic area to be studied by the principal
investigators. Because the project initially focused on Western Mexico, the traditional heartland for migration to the
United States, practically all of the earliest communities had significant indices of out-migration, which could easily
be detected using field interviews and simple observations of the frequency of new homes, foreign license plates,
currency exchanges, and international courier services.

Until 2000, we lacked access to a valid measure to indicate the intensity of emigration from specific municipalities and
the only measure indicating migration was the sex ratio. The only demographic fact regularly considered was the
community's sex ratio, which offer general picture of the intensity of the process of international migration because in
Mexico emigration is so heavily male. After an initial round of fieldwork, investigators compared their preliminary data
with census statistics and formation available from bibliographic sources. However, the MMP has never explicitly sought
to survey only communities with high rates of out-migration. Investigators simply seek to corroborate that there is some
migration from the community in question before proceeding. Then they select four specific locations to represent each
of four levels of urbanization:

- Ranchos: fewer than 2,500 inhabitants
- Pueblos (Towns): 2,500 to 10,000 inhabitants
- Mid-sized Cities: 10,000 to 100,000 inhabitants
- Large City: usually a particular neighborhood within in a state's capital city

In the pueblos and ranchos, investigators conduct a complete census of dwellings and undertake random selection from the
resulting list. In mid-sized cities and urban metropolises, investigators generally chose a traditional,
well-established neighborhood–one not dominated by recent rural-urban migrants. As a result, the urban samples are in
reality samples of urban neighborhoods or specifically demarcated quarters. In all cases, the neighborhood must have at
least 1,200 enumerated dwellings, from which a random sample of 200 is taken.

The methodology of the MMP thus yields results with a high degree of representativeness at the community level, and in
some of the smaller pueblos and ranchos investigators have been able to survey every household in the community. Given
that the sample is not targeted to migrants per se, but surveys the community as a whole, the project needs a fairly
large sample size to generate a significant number of migrants. Traditional methods of cluster sampling generally survey
small numbers of respondents across a large number of areas, but this generally yields small numbers of migrants to
study an inability to make generalizations at the community level. For example, rather than interviewing 20 households
in five communities we interview 100 households in one community, thereby enabling us to make generalizations about
migratory processes at the community level. If the frequency of migration is 30%, on average the surveys would contain
only six migrants in each of the five communities, rather than 30 migrants in one community.

At present we are able to draw upon an index of migratory developed for municipalities in Mexico’s National Population
Council (CONAPO) based on the 2000 and 2010 census. This index provides reliable information about the level of U.S.
migration prevailing at the municipal level and is particularly useful in identifying new communities of origin for
migrants in new sending states, where heretofore little information has been available. In sum, after 25 years of field
experience, the MMP continues to use anthropological criteria for selecting communities, which are then corroborated
with available data from the census and other sources to confirm the existence of migrants before making the final
selection.

## Ethnosurvey

The Ethnosurvey is eclectic and draws on methods and approaches well-known in sociology, anthropology, psychology, and
education. Its contribution and complexity lies in the way all these methods are combined within a single study. The
main idea for the Ethnosurvey is “to complement qualitative and quantitative procedures, so one's weakenesses become the
other's strength, yielding a body of data with greater reliability and more internal validity than is possible to
achieve using either method alone.” (Massey 1987).

The Ethnosurvey contains a series of tables that are organized around a particular topic, giving coherence to the
“conversation”. It follows a semi structured format to generate an interview schedule that is flexible, unobtrusive and
non-threatening. It requires that identical information be obtained for each person, but questions, wording and ordering
are not fixed. The precise phrasing and timing of each query is left to the judgment of the interviewer, depending on
circumstances.

In addition, the Ethnosurvey is explicitly designed to provide quantitative data for multi-level analysis by compiling
data at the individual, household, and community levels. Detailed community-level data are compiled at the time of the
survey by the fieldwork supervisor; these data are of great help to interpret the socioeconomic context within which
individuals and households interact (Massey 1987). This small questionnaire is referred to as the Community Data
Inventory.

## Interview Process

The questionnaires are applied in three phases. In the first phase, basic social and demographic data are collected from
all members of the household. The interview begins by identifying the household head and systematically enumerating the
spouse and children, beginning with the oldest. All children of the head are listed on the questionnaire whether or not
they live at home, but if a son or daughter is a member of another household, this fact is recorded. A child is
considered to be living in a separate household if he or she is married, maintains a separate house or kitchen, and
organizes expenses separately. After listing the head, spouse, and children, other household members are identified and
their relationship to the head clarified.

### Phase 1

A particularly important task in the first phase of the questionnaire is the identification of people with prior migrant
experience in either the United States or Mexico. For those individuals with migrant experience the interviewer records
the total number of U.S. trips, as well as information about the first and most recent U.S. trips, including the year,
duration, destination, U.S. occupation, legal status, and hourly wage. This exercise is then repeated for first and most
recent migrations within Mexico.

### Phase 2

The second phase of the ethnosurvey questionnaire compiles a year-by-year life history for all household heads,
including a childbearing history, a property history, a housing history, a business history, and a labor history. The
goal of this phase is to capture occupational mobility, health status, migration history, and family formation.

### Phase 3

The third and final phase of the questionnaire gathers information about the household head's experiences on his or her
most recent trip to the United States, including the mode of border-crossing, the kind and number of accompanying
relatives, the kind and number of relatives already present in the United States, the number of social ties that had
been formed with U.S. citizens, English language ability, job characteristics, and use of U.S. social services.

## Data Coding/Weights

### Data Coding and File Construction

After the ethnosurvey questionnaires are completed and revised, data are entered in Mexico. The entry programs perform
initial screening, range checks, and simple tests for logical consistency. The preliminary files are then transferred to
Princeton University, where additional data cleaning is performed, numeric codes are assigned to occupations and places,
and the final data sets are assembled into six primary data files, each providing a unique perspective of Mexican
migrants, their families, and their experiences. SIX primary files have been created, each corresponding to a different
unit of analysis: PERS, MIG, MIGOTHER, HOUSE, LIFE and SPOUSE. Data at the community level have been compiled in the
file: COMMUN.

### Weights

The MMP database provides community- and sample-specific weights. For each community, you will see a single weight for
all the households in the home country sample and another weight for all the households in the US sample.

When working with pooled data from multiple communities, these weights give you the option to adjust your estimates in
order to take into account the relative sizes of all the sampling frames. Whether you will need to weight your estimates
or not will depend on what your goal is.
